DRILL 2b — TCP vs UDP: The Real Tradeoff
Topic: TCP/IP fundamentals
Repeat until the reasoning is automatic, not just the packet counts.

--- THE CORE TRADEOFF ---
TCP guarantees ORDERED, COMPLETE delivery. If one piece is lost, TCP will not deliver
anything AFTER it until the missing piece is resent and confirmed — everything queues
and waits, no exceptions. This is the literal definition of "reliable."

UDP guarantees NOTHING. No resend, no ordering guarantee, no waiting. Whatever arrives,
arrives, in whatever order, and the application just keeps moving forward.

--- WHY THIS MATTERS: TWO REAL CASES ---
Live video call, one frame lost: TCP would FREEZE playback waiting for that one piece,
even though newer data already arrived and is sitting unusable behind it. UDP just skips
it — a barely-visible glitch, then moves on. For live media, a freeze is worse than a
glitch, so UDP wins.

SSH command, one packet lost: if a fragment of `rm -rf /tmp/old` were silently dropped
and never resent (as UDP would allow), the remote shell could execute a corrupted,
different, potentially destructive command. Correctness is non-negotiable here — a
half-second stall is a minor cost compared to running the wrong command. TCP wins.

Same underlying tradeoff (completeness vs speed), opposite conclusion, because the cost
of being wrong is completely different in each case. This reasoning generalizes to ANY
protocol choice, not just these two examples.

--- PROVE IT ON THE WIRE ---
sudo tcpdump -i enp1s0 -n udp port 53          # then run: dig google.com
sudo tcpdump -i enp1s0 -n tcp port 80           # then run: curl http://example.com

UDP shape: question packet, answer packet. TWO packets. No handshake. No confirmation.
TCP shape: SYN, SYN-ACK, ACK (3 just to start), then request, ack, response, ack(s), FIN.
TEN+ packets for the same single request/response. That gap IS the cost of reliability,
counted, not asserted.

--- PRODUCTION RELEVANCE ---
When choosing a protocol for a new system, ask: what's worse here — a brief stall while
data is confirmed, or silently losing/corrupting data to stay fast? That answer tells you
TCP or UDP, not a memorized rule about "video uses UDP."
