DRILL 06 — Traffic Analysis with tcpdump
Topic: Traffic Analysis
Repeat daily until instant.

--- READ ---
sudo tcpdump -i enp1s0 -n              # all traffic, no DNS resolution, raw and unfiltered
sudo tcpdump -i enp1s0 -n icmp         # filter to just ICMP (ping) traffic
sudo tcpdump -i enp1s0 -n tcp port 22  # filter to just SSH traffic

--- WHAT TO LOOK FOR ---
ICMP echo request / echo reply pairs        = ping working end to end
echo request with NO matching echo reply    = packet sent, never answered — proof something dropped it
SYN with no SYN-ACK                          = TCP equivalent — connection attempt, no response
seq numbers                                  = match each request to its specific reply, pinpoint exactly which packets vanished

--- KEY PRINCIPLE ---
tcpdump never lies about what crossed YOUR interface. Application logs can be wrong, missing,
or misleading — tcpdump shows the literal wire truth, no interpretation.

--- LIMITATION TO REMEMBER ---
A capture on YOUR machine alone proves what left your interface. It does NOT prove what
happened after — could be dropped by your own firewall, a router in between, or the
destination's firewall. To prove exactly where a packet died, you need captures on BOTH ends.

--- BREAK ---
sudo iptables -I OUTPUT -d 8.8.8.8 -p icmp -j DROP   # silently drop outbound ICMP
ping -c 2 8.8.8.8                                      # 100% packet loss
sudo tcpdump -i enp1s0 -n icmp                         # confirm: requests leave, no replies ever appear

--- FIX ---
sudo iptables -D OUTPUT -d 8.8.8.8 -p icmp -j DROP
ping -c 2 8.8.8.8                                      # confirm replies return

--- PRODUCTION SCENARIO ---
Two teams disagree: sender's app logs claim success, receiver claims nothing arrived.
Step 1: tcpdump on the sending machine during the exact request
Step 2: look for the equivalent of SYN/echo-request leaving
Step 3: look for SYN-ACK/echo-reply coming back
Step 4: state precisely what the evidence shows — "request left, no reply returned" —
        do NOT overclaim "it never reached them," only claim what you can prove from your side
Step 5: if you need to prove exactly where it died, you need a capture on the receiving end too

--- BANNER GRABBING: WHAT A SERVICE VOLUNTEERS BEFORE ANY LOGIN ---

CONCEPT:
A banner is information a service announces unprompted, the instant a connection opens,
before any authentication or real interaction. Pure reconnaissance for an attacker — zero
exploitation needed, the service hands it over for free.

GRAB AN SSH BANNER:
echo "" | nc -w 2 localhost 22
Reveals: exact SSH implementation, version, and (on Ubuntu) the distro patch suffix.
Why it matters: a published vulnerability for a specific version gives attackers a
pre-built target list just by scanning for this exact string.

GRAB AN HTTP/nginx BANNER:
curl -I http://localhost
Look at the "Server:" header. Default nginx reveals full version + OS in this header.

MITIGATION — nginx (config-controllable):
server_tokens off;   in /etc/nginx/nginx.conf
Removes version number from the Server header. Verify with: curl -I, check Server: line.
Always back up config first, test with `nginx -t`, then reload — never edit blind.

MITIGATION — SSH (PARTIALLY controllable, honest limitation):
VersionAddendum none   in /etc/ssh/sshd_config
This does NOT remove the core "SSH-2.0-OpenSSH_X.X" string — that's part of the protocol
itself. On Ubuntu specifically, it also does NOT remove the distro suffix
(e.g. "Ubuntu-3ubuntu13.16") — that's compiled into the binary at package build time,
not something sshd_config can reach. Verified directly: even with VersionAddendum
correctly set and confirmed active via `sudo sshd -T`, the banner is unchanged.

REAL LESSON: not everything a service leaks is fixable from its config file. Some
information is baked in at compile time. The professional response isn't "configure it
away" when that's not possible — it's knowing the limitation exists and compensating
elsewhere: stay patched, scope access tightly with firewall rules (Topic 6), don't expose
SSH to the internet unnecessarily. A banner you can't hide is mitigated by reducing who
can reach it and ensuring the version itself has no known exploitable vulnerabilities.

VERIFY CURRENT LIVE CONFIG (not just the file on disk):
sudo sshd -T | grep -i versionaddendum
This shows what's actually loaded and active right now, not what the file claims.

--- SAVING CAPTURES TO DISK (pcap) AND READING THEM BACK ---

WHY IT MATTERS:
Live tcpdump output is gone the moment it scrolls past. Real investigations happen AFTER
an incident — you need traffic SAVED to disk so you can read it as many times as needed,
the same way a security camera needs to record, not just display a live feed.

SAVE A CAPTURE:
sudo tcpdump -i <interface> -n tcp port <port> -w ~/capture.pcap &
disown
sleep 2                              # confirm it's actually running before triggering traffic
ls -lh ~/capture.pcap                # should be non-zero / growing once traffic occurs
sudo pkill tcpdump                   # stop the capture when done

READ A SAVED CAPTURE BACK:
sudo tcpdump -r ~/capture.pcap -n              # read entire file
sudo tcpdump -r ~/capture.pcap -n -c 15         # read just the first N packets, reliably
                                                  # (piping to `head` can throw "Broken pipe" —
                                                  # harmless, but use -c instead for clean output)

--- REAL GOTCHA: SELF-DIRECTED TRAFFIC USES LOOPBACK, NOT THE PHYSICAL INTERFACE ---
SSH'ing to your OWN machine's own IP (e.g. ssh user@<this-machine's-own-ip>) does NOT
necessarily travel through enp1s0. It can resolve entirely through `lo`, the loopback
interface, never touching the physical NIC at all — even though you typed a "real" IP,
not 127.0.0.1. Verified directly: capturing on enp1s0 caught ZERO packets for a self-
directed SSH session; capturing the identical traffic on `lo` caught everything.
LESSON: when traffic seems to "disappear," check whether you're watching the right
interface — self-traffic and loopback-routed traffic are easy to miss if you assume
the physical interface sees everything.

--- REAL GOTCHA: ONE PCAP FILE CAN CONTAIN MULTIPLE UNRELATED SESSIONS ---
A continuously running capture doesn't separate connections for you — multiple SSH
attempts (including failed ones) can all land in the same file, distinguishable only
by timestamp and by tracking SYN/FIN boundaries per conversation. Don't assume "the
traffic in this file" means one clean session — check timestamps and connection
boundaries before drawing conclusions from a shared capture file.

--- REAL GOTCHA: CAPTURE TIMING CAN MISS THE TRUE START OF A CONNECTION ---
If a connection's handshake (SYN/SYN-ACK/ACK) completes in the brief window before or
exactly as tcpdump starts, you can genuinely miss it — even with a deliberate delay
before triggering traffic. The first packet you see might already be mid-handshake or
mid-session. LESSON for real investigations: monitoring that starts even slightly late
can permanently lose the chance to see how a connection began. Continuous, always-on
capture (not just "start it when I think something's about to happen") is the only way
to guarantee you see a connection's true beginning.

--- WHAT ENCRYPTED SSH TRAFFIC LOOKS LIKE ON THE WIRE ---
After the initial handshake, SSH traffic is uniform-looking, small (often ~36 bytes),
rapid-fire packets in both directions — this is the encrypted keystroke-by-keystroke
rhythm of an interactive session. No readable usernames, passwords, or commands are
visible — that's the actual security boundary SSH provides, visible by its absence in
the capture. A larger packet near the very start (e.g. ~124 bytes) is typically the
key exchange/encryption negotiation, before the connection settles into small uniform
packets.
