DRILL 07 — Network Namespaces and the Docker Bridge
Topic: Network Namespaces
Repeat daily until instant.

--- CONCEPT ---
A network namespace is a complete, private copy of the network stack: its own interfaces,
its own IP, its own routing table, its own firewall rules — isolated from the host and from
every other namespace, even though all of them run on the same physical kernel and hardware.
Same idea as PID namespaces from Module 15, applied to networking instead of processes.

--- THE BRIDGE ---
docker0 is a virtual switch on the HOST side. Every container's private namespace connects
to it via a virtual cable. docker0 acts as the container network's gateway (e.g. 172.17.0.1),
then forwards traffic out through the host's real interface (enp1s0) to reach the internet —
same routing concept as Topic 2, just with an extra hop through the bridge first.

--- READ ---
ip a show docker0                              # host's view of the bridge — UP only when something's connected
sudo docker ps                                  # what's running
sudo docker inspect <container> | grep -A 20 "NetworkSettings"   # container's private IP/gateway
curl -I http://<container-ip>                   # prove host-to-container connectivity across the bridge

--- WHY 172.17.x.x LOOKS DIFFERENT FROM 192.168.x.x ---
Both are private, non-internet-routable address ranges — just different reserved blocks,
chosen so they never accidentally collide. /16 vs /24 changes how much of the address is
"network" vs "host" — same subnet math as before, just a bigger available range for containers.

--- BREAK (start a namespace) ---
sudo docker run -d --name test-container nginx
sudo docker inspect test-container | grep -A 5 '"IPAddress"'   # confirm private IP assigned
ip a show docker0                                                # confirm bridge came UP

--- FIX (clean teardown) ---
sudo docker stop test-container
sudo docker rm test-container
ip a show docker0    # bridge returns to idle if no other containers are attached

--- PRODUCTION SCENARIO ---
A container can't reach the internet, but the host can.
Check: ip a show docker0 — is the bridge UP?
Check: docker inspect — does the container have a valid IP and gateway assigned?
Check: from the host, curl the container's IP directly — does host-to-container work?
If host-to-container works but container-to-internet doesn't, the problem is in NAT/forwarding
rules on the host (iptables), not the namespace itself — namespace isolation is working correctly,
the bridge's path OUT is what's broken.
